when you hear the word debt people often
think about student debt and credit card
debt but it's actually the entire base
the foundation of our monetary system
and if we don't learn about it we are
going to be crushed you came here for
the truth so let me unveil that for you
in today's video I want to talk about
all things debt we're going to look at
the United States we're going to look at
Canada we're going to look at this all
over the place and if you stay tuned
we're going to look at a picture of
Janet Yellen the very first thing I want
to start with is this the start of D
dollarization I showed this recently and
what you're looking at here is China's
gradual move away from the US dollar
there's no question about that but
understand something this is the share
of Foreign Exchange transactions it's
mostly US Dollars you can take that US
dollar the basically any country in the
world in fact even those that the US has
heavily sanctioned and that US dollar is
likely worth even more than their local
currency the important Point here is
that this cash this money like if you
had a $100 bill it is actually made of
debt it's it's such an odd concept and
even I'm always kind of re- reminding
myself that this is not something of
value it is actually something that's in
the negative it's such a weird concept
to understand it has in a sense negative
value it's so hard to wrap your mind
around sometimes Canada to spend more on
debt after rate forecasts Edge higher
and we've heard a lot about this before
and one of the problems with Canada and
there are many one of the problems is
that Canada number one has way too much
household debt we know this but as a
country they pumped in even more money
per capita than the United States did
during 2020 at the same time we have
high interest rates or higher interest
rates than we've been used to for a
while and of course this puts pressure
on the country as a whole Canada's
government says we spend more on debt
cost this year as it updates its
forecast to reflect a higher than
expected outlook for interest rates
they're going to spend billions of
dollars on public debt charges in the
2425 fiscal
year that means means you the individual
need to ultimately pay more they're
going to tax you more they're going to
squeeze more out of you and this is all
in the calls for hey we got to cut
interest rates we need to do this now
for so many different reasons right well
that is just one thing it's the same
same in Canada and everywhere else but
it connects with this a debt crisis at
the economy's edge this is out of the
financial times and they have several
good charts in here so I wanted to show
it to you all right right looking at
this they show us the the household debt
and this is just one example okay
household
debt as a percentage of the GDP down
significantly so everything's good right
everything's great isn't it let me make
that so you can see that look at that
household debt Rose
considerably during this period of
time since then it has been declining
now of course 2020 bit of an anomaly so
that means uh you know everything's
great right well what's important is
that Mortgage Debt hadn't been uh such
an issue uh at this time now than than
it was before okay so that's really what
it's all about that's the important note
when we look at this household debt
subcategories as a percentage of GDP so
a lot of that has come down the student
loans of course haven't been uh paid off
they've been forgiven so that's on your
back now um auto loans I think that's a
a little bit of of something to watch
there because the auto loans themselves
are getting stretched out further and
further that's important to
note and then uh credit card debt has
been rising as well with delinquencies
90day plus delinquencies rising to
levels I think it we're at a record high
I I could be wrong on that but I did
show that in the last couple weeks here
but it is is excessive it's it's near uh
a very high point there's no question
about that Americans in the aggregate
don't have a debt problem that's the
financial times they're telling you that
except of course for the debt carried by
their government but aggregation
deceives as we have discussed before
households who are on the lower end of
the income spectrum and carry floating
rate debt appear to be in real trouble
this is showing up in both delinquency
statistics and the earnings of companies
that serve the working class and the
poor and that that's where we get to
this you could see for yourself
transition into serious delinquency 90
plus days credit cards right and so
there we are we're not quite for credit
cards anyway uh for a lot of that we are
moving back into the direction of 2008
2009 that was a financial CR like now
we're in the good times aren't we we're
not in a recession supposedly
unemployment is super low the jobs are
abundant this is this is the good time
so why is the delinquencies acting like
we're in like deep in a recession here
isn't that
unusual isn't that
unusual right you go look at the maxed
out borrowers see increasing
delinquencies you could see how
excessive this becomes for people
they're being pushed to the edge and
that's why they go on the buy now pay
later type programs if they have nothing
else all right gold of course is kind of
a hedge against the inflation that we've
been seeing it's kind of a hedge against
the US dollar and anytime you see
turbulence gold becomes more attractive
so of course its performance over the
last little while has been you know has
been attractive there's no question
about
that understand that there's a deeper
level to this as well so we can see the
household Deb we look at the credit
cards I'm showing you all the different
forms of
debt China sells a record sum of US debt
amid signs of diversification I said
this before they're selling off US debt
they're buying gold that's the short
story okay and so over time they've been
selling selling selling a lot of their
US debt in fact you just look at the
stats 2013 2014 time frame it's at the
peak about $ 1.3 trillion do worth and
now they are at about half of that
they've been selling that down over time
some months maybe a little bit more than
some months that you know it's down but
the the trend has been very clear it's
been down for many years right now China
is diversifying they're also doing B
like why would they hold US Dollars well
you hold US dollars if your currency you
know is if there makes sense are are you
going to be doing deals with other
countries in US dollars for China a lot
of the deals that they're doing today
are not in US dollar so over time it's
making less and less and less sense to
hold US dollar but this is another thing
because we've talked about the potential
some have suggested this the potential
that China could use this as a like a
financial weapon of war that they could
basically say boom we're going to just
just collapse all of this um and flood
the market suddenly with that I don't
think they could ever do that and would
do that but if they wanted to they can
you know utilize it in a way that would
be damaging to the United States
that was the suggestion it's like a
nuclear option not just the US Global
debt to GDP ratios are skyrocketing and
we've heard this all before you look
just look at Europe my goodness um I
think it's clear what has happened um
but just looking at this for a lot of
countries they are in the same mess this
is just the US government that to GDP
and that has risen since 2020 it's never
going to come back into reality uh over
100% you know you you just don't find it
getting back to what they would call
normal right credit card debt everything
everything has gone berserk there's no
question about that and I promised you
if you got this far that we'll look at a
picture of Janet I mean we'll scroll
quickly P it but you know I want to give
people what they came here for
so Yellen says higher path for rates
boost the need to lift revenue and so I
think it's important not just to stare
into her eyes but to also look at what's
going on they're talking about the
interested GDP metric however you could
see we've raised the interest rate
forecast that does make a difference it
makes it somewhat more challenging to
keep the de deficits and interest
expense under
control what we see here is that like
you could see it right here this is the
favorite debt metric historically normal
range
supposedly you cannot keep the debt
under control under these circumstances
they always say it's manageable you
could say over and over you hear that
all the time from people in the industry
from people even you know articles and
stuff uh the debt is manageable but of
course it's not manageable interest
rates are now far too high and even when
they were low like just the interest
payments there are some expectations
depending on the way things go that
there's going to be 1.6 trillion dollar
worth of interest payments on the
national debt and we're in supposed the
good times and you might say well you
know what it's all like you know on the
balance sheets it's all It's All Digital
it's not going to create inflation or
whatever but you got to understand that
interest is being paid before your roads
are getting built before your health
care is getting done before all the
education is being paid for and
everything the interest gets paid first
first so that takes away from
productivity one one trillion plus
whatever it is at this moment one
trillion plus taken away from productive
means every single year and who knows
probably you know is it next year's 2
trillion all of that taken away from
productive means in order to have this
silly Game of Death being borne out of
nothing being born out of nothing but
the more time that I spend with it and
sort of think about this it's actually
downward it's like it's being born but
not like like a flower coming out of the
ground or a plant coming out of the
ground it's actually born downward and
we have we take from that debt only
going further because it goes further
and fur you can't pay the debt off
there's an interest associated with that
debt and so it only goes deeper and
deeper and deeper it's the most unusual
thing
like wild anyway so while the stock
market might be cheering up rich
Americans as doing little to invigorate
the less affluent who are trapped by
inflation and struggling to cover debts
thanks to Sky High borrowing costs
inflation is a pressure cooker and that
largely why consumer sentiment is so
negative talking about the vibe session
here was Co to describe the Gloom
feelings about among the electorate look
what's Happening Here is overwhelmingly
people are screwed people are in trouble
and that system itself is the reason you
know you can't simply vote somebody in
to fix it it's not going to work because
this system exists it's designed to make
you poor that that's the whole point
that's the whole point it's really it's
really what's happening okay America's $
38 trillion retirement pool is nowhere
near enough this is all part of it
intentional so that you need to succumb
to whatever that they are pushing
whether it's the Ubi whether it's a
cbdc they're going to force feed you
something and you're going to have to
take it unless you are prepared to the
max you got to do what you can you got
to upale as best you can you got to
learn things basic things a lot of you
know how-to kind of videos they're
available online you can get that sort
of stuff you can learn a lot of things
that you don't need to be reliant on
someone else you want to grow Garden oh
that's expensive oh that's going to take
too much time oh no it's not no it's not
okay you got to look at these things and
take it more seriously whatever that is
for you because this system is in what I
consider to be a slow and steady rot
okay so there are times when it goes too
fast and other times it's a little
slower but you can see it over time you
just kind of zoom out hundreds of years
and you see that direction in particular
since 1913 oops were you allowed to talk
about that okay what can you do as
individuals I think it's important to
have our education as best to the levels
best we can I have my free course called
Compass there's no email required no
paywall required totally 100% free the
money gps.com just click on Compass you
can share that with your family your
friends super super easy course okay
that's the number one thing if you
wanted to get to the advanced level I
help people uh on Friday for over two
hours and on Sunday for over two hours
actually not just saying you know here's
a bunch of information I actually help
people boots on the ground to get them
hopefully to a point where they can
understand this um and and what I
believe to be the absolute best way
we're talking about building a physical
products business even in these most
challenging times trust me okay this is
what it's all about and I I want to
thank you for being here if you
appreciate this video hit that thumbs up
button and I'll see you soon take care